Übung 404: Inge Klompmakers, Vortrag vom 17.12.12Lecture Notes: Modern Japanese Prints, ca. 1900–1960These are lecture notes about the lecture given by Inge Klompmakers, on December 17, 2012, on modern Japanese prints at University of Zurich. Inge Klompmakers is the author of the book “Of Brigands and Bravery: Kuniyoshi’s Heroes of the Suikoden.”The lecture covers two major movements of Japanese woodblock prints in the first half of the 20th century, Shin Hanga and Sôsaku Hanga.There will be a chronological order of the various print movements. Shin Hanga was a new style of woodblock prints in the 20th century, which still used the Hanmoto system to produce the prints. A different approach to the matter made Sôsaku Hanga. The distinctive character of Sôsaku Hanga was the idea that the artist should have full control of the print. The artist was in charge of design, carving and printing, three of the four stages of the creation of a woodblock print.Shin Hanga and Sôsaku Hanga were not as homogenous as generally considered. Prints from Shin Hanga as well as Sôsaku Hanga artist range from Ukiyo-e style prints to abstract designs. Please refer to Amy Reigle Newland’s work for more background on these new print movements.The new Hanga movements differed from previous movements in style and sentiment. The work of new Hanga was initially not considered fine arts. Yet, in the Japanese art world around 1900 traditional Ukiyo-e was already on the decline. Some artists still worked with traditional motives like Yakusha-e (actor prints) or Bijinga (pictures of pretty women). With the new movement depictions of military and battle scenes emerged, motives that used to be banned.At the same time Western art started to influence Japanese artists. In 1887 the Tokyo School of fine arts (Tokyo Bijutsu Gakkô) was founded with a curriculum in Nihonga paintings, yet woodblock prints were not included. Some time later a new curriculum on Western paintings was added. Students were trained in various styles of Nihonga and Western painting that eventually influenced Shin Hanga.Shin Hanga and Sôsaku Hanga artists worked mostly as hired painters. For example Hashiguchi Goyô was commissioned for a poster of the famous Mitsukoshi Department Store in 1911. Kawase Hasui was one of the few who achieved a living as a Hanga artist, whose work includes the poster of Fuyuzankai exhibition on avant-garde art.Some artists went to Europe in order to learn various new styles like Cubism, Futurism and Post-impressionism. The Shirakaba journal, first published in 1910, was one of the most important magazines to promote Western literature and art. Due to technical limitation at the time the magazine contained black and white illustrations only which thus limited the perception of Western art. Another way to experience Western art were exhibitions that showed prints of paintings of avant-garde Western artists.The woodblocks of Shin Hanga were not destroyed because the blocks were the artists or publishers capital.  Woodblocks of Sôsaku Hanga were probably preserved as well, unlike western woodblocks that were meant for very limited number of prints and were subsequently destroyed.Shin HangaShin Hanga can be divided in several traditional categories: the Bijinga (prints of beautiful women), the Yakusha-e (actor prints), Kachôga (flower and bird prints) and Fûkeiga (prints of scenery) with a subcategory, the Meisho-e (prints of noted places). Artist specialized in these categories; for example, Ohara Koson was famous for his Kachôga bird designs.The New Hanga prints were in high demand abroad as well as in Japan. But at the beginning of the century prints were not yet allowed in government exhibitions and were not considered fine arts. But that would change in the year 1924 where woodblock prints were allowed for the first time in the Imperial exhibitions.An artist of the Shin Hanga movement was Yoshida Hiroshi, who made oil paintings before he promoted wood block prints in Japan and abroad. He organized several exhibitions around the world. His third exhibition in the United States was canceled, due to the Russo-Japanese war and the upcoming nationalism in Japan. Japanese symbols didn’t seem romantic and innocent to Western audience anymore. But in Japan, prints depicting the military and Japanese colonies were put in exhibition to boost public moral.Another promoter of Shin Hanga prints in the West was Robert O. Muller. He set up a business to distribute Japanese prints in Chicago in 1939. Yet after the attack on Pearl Harbor sales dropped. He owns an important Shin Hanga collection. His son still runs a shop selling prints today. Muller was not a fan of Sôsaku Hanga prints and called them “do-it-yourself prints.”After the war, American soldiers brought Sôsaku Hanga back home because they were cheap and a good souvenir. In the 1950ies Sôsaku Hanga was a popular export and Saito Kiyoshi won 1951 at the Sao Paolo Biennale in California. Several Western Museums, for example, the British Museum own important Shin Hanga collections.Sôsaku HangaThe main principles of Sôsaku Hanga were Jiga, Jikoku, and Jizuri, that is, Self drawn, Self carved, and Self printed. Self-expression was most important in this art form. The artist is the sole creator and as such aspires to show maximum expression, but would typically not include self-publishing. The new prints were modern in production and modern in style.One of the most well known Sôsaku Hanga prints is the “Fisherman” by Yamamoto Kanae, made in 1904. Kanae was trained as a wood carver but new woodblock prints as an art form was not yet widely respected. Two artists of the Sôsaku movement were Ishii Hakutei and Onchi Kôshirô.Ishii Hakutei was educated both in traditional and Western art. He started the Bijinga-series “Twelve views of Tokyo” (Tôkyô Jûnikei) in 1910. This series renewed the Ukiyo-e prints and was a forerunner of the Shin Hanga. Ishii used traditional Ukiyo-e motives but chose a very contemporary style. He hired a professional wood carver rather than carving the woodblocks himself.Onchi Kôshirô’s prints were promoted by the Japanese wood block print society. Compared to Meiji artist that designed hundreds of woodblock prints, Onchi produced just a couple of prints. He didn’t see the point in making the same print over and over again, he wanted just to produce one perfect print, and than create something new. Onchi didn’t see himself as a copyist. Watanabe Shôzaburô Watanabe Shôzaburô is listed as one of the first Shin Hanga prints distributor. Watanabe hired many artists, among them Takahashi Shotei, who created Shin Hanga prints. Another collaboration of Watanabe was with Austrian artist Fritz Capelari, who lived in Japan. Watanabe hired Capelari after seeing his works in a Japanese department store. Capelari excelled in watercolor paintings. For Watanabe he created landscape and Bijinga designs based on his paintings.Other Western artists that worked with Watanabe were Charles W. Bartlett and Elizabeth Keith. Keith made some 100 print designs and Bartlett about 40 designs. Japanese artist Hashiguchi Goyô made mainly Bijin-prints with Watanabe. For example 1918 the Bijinga “Woman Applying Powder.”Ito Shinsui, famous for prints of female beauties, made more than 60 designs for Watanabe, among them the print “Before the Mirror”. Kawase Hasui submitted paintings to Watanabe to be turned into woodblock prints. Shinsui and Hasui were Watanabe’s most productive artists.Watanabe brought forth prints in demand. They were contemporary in style, showed with the newest fashion trends and sometimes abstract. Watanabe’s shop was completely destroyed in the Great Kantô earthquake, 1923. Because all the woodblocks were lost, Watanabe had to rebuild his business from scratch. Ikeda Yoson chose to portrait the aftermath of this disaster in his prints. Inspired by Munch and Goya he shows the misery and depression of the disaster. The city was rapidly rebuilt and new prints show that development and the new buildings.